Welcome to this lecture where we
will talk about Dijkstra's algorithm,
a fundamental graph theory algorithm that
handles the single-source shortest path problem.
The example we will work with is this graph, we
have this weighted graph where vertices represent
locations, an edge between two vertices
means that we can go from one to the other,
and a weight represents the distance between those
two locations. And we want to find the shortest
path from the source vertex A to every other
vertex. How will we proceed? The idea that we get
is to push a liquid starting from the source, and
see how much distance it traverses before reaching
each vertex. For the source vertex, it's already
there, it traverses a distance of 0 to reach it.
It starts running in directions that we
can take from A, we have 4 directions,
the one from A to B, from A to E, from A
to F, and from A to C. It keeps running,
and a first part reaches the vertex B after a
distance of 7, let's pause to see what happens.
The liquid reached B for the first time, and it
did after traversing a distance of 7. We can say
that the shortest distance to reach B from A is
7. And we know that it's the shortest distance
because it's the first time the liquid reaches B.
Basically the first time liquid reaches a vertex
determines the shortest distance to go from A to
that vertex, this is the strategy we're using.
Liquid now doesn't stop at B, it will continue
towards D and E. Let's continue the simulation
to see what happens. It keeps running, and it
reaches the vertex C after a distance of 10.
We can say that the shortest
distance to reach C is 10.
We continue, and the liquid reaches D, with
a distance of 11, the shortest distance to
reach D is 11. Which we get by going to
B, 7, then going to D, 4, and 7+4 is 11.
We continue, and it reaches E, with a distance
of 13, we write that 13 is the shortest distance
to reach E. Let's continue, just after it
some liquid reaches F, with a distance of 14.
We continue. Some liquid arrived at G after a
total distance of 23. We continue. Some liquid
reaches H after traversing a distance of 27.
We continue, we reach I with a distance of 28.
We keep walking. We reach J with a distance
of 33. Then we continue, we reach K with a
distance of 35. And we continue, we reach L with a
distance of 36. We finished reaching every vertex,
we now know the shortest distance to go from A
to any other vertex. And that's the core idea of
Dijkstra's algorithm. By the way, this is called
the shortest-path tree, a subgraph of G where
the path from root to a vertex v represents the
shortest path from the root to v in the graph G.
However, in practice, we won't simulate the
liquid movement, we will directly calculate
at what time it will arrive at each vertex. For
example if we're at the vertex E with a distance
of 13 and we have a vertex to G of length 10, we
know that by taking that direction we arrive at G
with a distance of 23, we don't need to simulate
the whole process of liquid traversing that edge.
Let's redo this example but
without simulating liquid.
We have this table dist where dist[v] represents
the smallest distance we need to arrive at the
vertex v. At the beginning, we don't even know
if we will reach the vertices at some point,
we can just put infinity, to say that we didn't
find any path yet. For the source vertex A,
we start at it, so we reach it with
a distance of 0, we're already there.
We can start working now. What's the first vertex
we reach? It's obviously A, we start from there.
From A we have 4 edges, to B C E
and F. To B with a distance of 7,
so we know that we will be at B after traversing
a distance of 7. How did we calculate that? We
took the shortest distance to A, which is 0, and
we added the distance from A to B, which is 7.
We got 7, which is smaller than infinity,
we found a shorter way to go to B. For C,
the distance is 10, we will reach the vertex C at
time 10. Then E with a distance of 13, so we know
that we will be at E after traversing a distance
of 13. And to F with a distance of 14, same thing.
Now we suppose that liquid starts running, what
is the first vertex they will reach? To know it,
we take the unvisited vertex with the smallest
arrival time, with the smallest value of dist[v].
It's obviously B, it's the one
with the earliest distance.
Okay we're at B with a distance of 7, we deduce
that the shortest distance to reach B is 7.
Let's check its out-neighbors.
It has an edge to D and E.
To D with a distance of 4, and we traversed a
distance of 7 to reach B, we deduce that we can
reach D with a distance of 7+4, 11, better than
infinity, we put 11 in dist[D]. Also to E with a
distance of 8, we deduce that we can reach E with
a distance of 7+8, 15. But, dist[E] is 13, which
is smaller than 15, this is why we don't update,
we found a better path before, dist[E] remains 13.
Okay we traversed B, what is the next vertex
liquid will reach? At distance 8 nothing happens,
at distance 9 nothing happens, and at distance
10 we reach C, it has the earliest time, 10.
From C we can go to F and I. To F with a distance
of 12. And 10+12 is 22, so we found a way to go
from A to F with a distance of 22. However,
dist[F] is 14, which is smaller, so we know
that we will arrive at F earlier, we don't update.
And to I with a distance of 22. 10+22 gives 32,
and it's better than infinity, we update, we
now know how to reach I with a distance of 32.
We might find a better path later, but
32 is the best distance we found so far.
Okay what's the next vertex liquid will
reach? We have D with 11, E with 13,
F with 14, and I with 32, infinity for others.
Liquid will reach D, because it has the earliest
arrival time among vertices we didn't visit yet.
From D we can go to E and G. To E with
a distance of 6, 11+6 is 17, same thing,
it doesn't replace, 17 is not smaller
than 13. And to G with a distance of 15,
11+15 is 26, better than infinity, we
found a path of length 26 to reach G.
What's the next vertex? It's E, with a distance
of 13. You can see that we're considering only
vertices that we didn't visit yet. E can
go to G and F. To F with a distance of 7,
13+7 is 20, doesn't replace. And to
G with a distance of 10, 13+10 is 23,
and here it's smaller than 26, dist[G], what does
it mean? It means that earlier, we found a path
to G whose the length is 26, but now we found
a better path, whose the length is only 23,
this is why we replace, we now say that
the earliest time to reach G so far is 23.
With the liquid example, it means that there
was some liquid that was planning to arrive
at G at distance 26, but we found another part
that will reach G sooner. We might still find
better paths later, because we didn't reach G
yet, we're just discovering paths going to it.
What's the next vertex? It's F, with a distance
of 14. It can go to G, H and I. To G with
a distance of 11, and 14+11 is 25, it doesn't
replace, we have 23. To H with 13, 14+13 is 27.
We never found a path to H before so we replace.
And to I with 14, 14+14 is 28, it also replaces.
What's the next vertex? We still have K J
L H G and I. The next one is G, with 23,
it has the smallest distance among remaining
vertices. It can go to H and J. To H with 12,
23+12 is 35, it doesn't replace. And to J
with 12, 23+12 is 35, it replaces infinity.
Next vertex to be reached is H, with a distance
of 27. It can go to J K and L. To J with 6, 27+6
is 33, it replaces 35, so we found a better path
to go to J. To K with 8, 27+8 is 35, it replaces.
And to L with 9, 27+9 is 36, it replaces. Next
vertex is I with a distance of 28. We reached
I after traversing a distance of 28 so the
shortest distance to go from A to I is 28.
It can go to H and L. To H, it doesn't replace,
to L, it doesn't replace. Next vertex is J with
a distance of 33. It can go to K. To K, we get
the same distance as dist[K] so nothing changes.
Next vertex is K with a distance of 35. It can
go to L. To L, the sum is 45, it doesn't replace.
Last vertex, L, with a distance of
36. It doesn't have out-neighbors.
We traversed all vertices, so we finished the
process, we got that the shortest distance to
go from A to A is 0, from A to K is 35, from A
to C is 10, from A to J is 33, from A to E is 13,
from A to L is 36, from A to B is 7, from A to
F is 14, from A to H is 27, from A to D is 11,
from A to G is 23, and from A to I is 28. Okay
okay what happened here? I know that some of you
lost the track and zoned out while I was doing
the example. Short attention span problem keeps
increasing and that's terrible to be honest, I'm
suffering from it too, but anyway. In this example
we've seen how Dijkstra's algorithm works. We can
understand it by imagining ourselves dropping a
liquid from the source vertex A, it keeps running
in all available directions. And every time
some liquid reaches a vertex the first time, the
distance it took to do so represents the shortest
distance to reach that vertex, the shortest
because no other liquid could reach it before.
And when we reach a vertex, we check neighbors
of that vertex to calculate at what time we
will arrive at them. In this animation, liquid
start at A, then they first reach B, then C,
then D, then E, F, G, H, I, J, K, and L, in this
chronological order. The alphabetical order is
just a coincidence by the way. And this is what
we try to replicate in the Dijkstra's algorithm,
if you noticed, we traversed vertices in
chronological order, A B C D E F G H I J K L.
Because we were keeping track of the earliest
time we will arrive at each vertex, and we kept
moving to the one with the smallest value in
dist, because it represents the next vertex
liquid will reach. By doing so, we're making sure
that we're reaching a vertex as soon as possible,
hence, with the shortest distance, that's
why the Dijkstra's algorithm works.
If you're still confused, you just
need to imagine liquid running in
all available directions, and each time
it finds a new vertex, we deduce that the
shortest distance to reach it from source
is the total distance it traversed so far.
But instead of simulating this process,
we keep track of earliest time we will
arrive at each vertex, to be able to find
the next vertex in chronological order.
Having a look at the pseudocode might give you
a better understanding, some people feel more
comfortable with clear instructions instead
of visualizations of examples, so let's try
to convert what we did into pseudocode. Remember
that at the beginning dist[u] was infinity for
each vertex u, because we didn't know any path.
We also need a structure open that represents
vertices we didn't visit yet with their respective
value in dist. So in pseudocode, we create those
two structures, then for each vertex u, we put
infinity in dist[u] and we add the vertex to open.
We know that the shortest distance to
reach the source is 0, so we update,
we put 0 in dist[source].
Now we can start traversing,
we keep traversing while we still have open
vertices, vertices that we didn't visit.
During the process, we were always going to the
unvisited vertex with the smallest value in dist,
to follow the chronological order of events. This
is why, we extract the vertex u from open that has
the smallest value dist[u], it represents
the next new vertex liquid will reach.
When extracting it we remove it from open by
the way, because it's no longer unvisited.
What to do with this vertex u now?
We need to traverse its neighbors.
By the way, in a weighted graph, elements in
the adjacency list aren't a simple destination
vertex, they're a tuple of two elements, the
destination vertex and the weight of the edge.
This is why when traversing neighbors
we write for v, w in graph[u],
to get both the destination and
the weight, we need them both.
During the process, we were traversing neighbors
to check if we didn't find a better path than the
actual one, and this is what we will do now. For
each v, w in graph[u], we start by calculating the
distance of the new path. It's the distance
we traversed to reach the actual vertex u,
which is dist[u], + the length of the edge that
will take us to the neighbor v, its length is w.
For example when we were at H we said
to J with 6, 27+6 is 33. 27 was dist[H],
6 was the weight of the edge from H to J, and
the sum was the length of the new path, 33.
So the distance of the new path is dist[u]+w, the
distance to reach u + the distance to go to v from
u. And now, we compare it with the length of the
actual shortest path to reach v, which is dist[v].
In the same example we compared 33, the
length of the new path we found, with 35,
the length of the best path we had found so far,
dist[v]. And because 33 was smaller than 35,
what we did, we replaced, we replaced dist[v] by
the length of the new path, which is dist[u]+w.
And that's what we call edge relaxation, the
action of checking if the edge produces a better
path than the actual best one. And that's it for
the loop instructions, the loop will continue
like that, it keeps moving to the next vertex in
chronological order while updating dist table.
After the loop, dist table now holds the shortest
distance to reach each vertex starting from the
source, we return it, and that's the Dijkstra's
algorithm. If you had to remember two lines on how
the algorithm works, it's that we put infinity
for all vertices except source, we put 0,
then we keep extracting the next vertex to be
reached, the one with the smallest value in dist,
and we check its neighbors to check if the
actual vertex leads to better paths, that's it.
But wait, the algorithm is just returning the
shortest distance to reach other vertices,
but not the actual path, it's not returning
what vertices to take to minimize the distance.
To add this feature, we can just keep track
of the previous vertex of each vertex.
To do so, every time we update dist[v],
we also update its previous vertex.
With our example, at the beginning all
vertices don't have a previous vertex,
we didn't find any path that leads to them.
With A, we update dist[B], dist[E], dist[F],
and dist[C]. So we put A as their previous vertex,
the vertex they came from in their shortest path.
Then we went to B, where we updated dist[D], so we
put B as the previous vertex of D. Then we went to
C where we updated dist[I], so we put C as the
previous vertex of I. Basically every time we
find a better path for v by going from the actual
vertex u, we put u as the previous vertex of v.
The process continues like that, at the end we
get this prev table. Now if we want to retrieve
the shortest path from source to a vertex v, we
just keep going backwards by using the prev table.
Let's suppose that we want the shortest path to
go from A to L. L is the last vertex, we put it
in the path. prev[L] is H, we go to it and we put
it in the path. prev[H] is F, we go to it and we
put it in the path. prev[F] is A, we go to it and
put it in the path. prev[A] is null, so we went
back to the source, we finished making the path,
we just reverse it before returning it to get it
in the right order, from source to destination,
not the opposite. In pseudocode, we first need to
update what we made earlier to add the feature of
keeping track of previous. Very easy, we create a
table prev. And initially the previous vertex
of each vertex is null, we don't know it yet.
Then while working in the loop, every time we're
on the vertex u and find a better path to go to v,
u becomes the previous vertex of v because of
the new path we found, so we put u in prev[v].
After the loop, we return both dist table and prev
table, we need them both. We also need a function
to reconstruct the path, it takes as parameters
the prev table we built and the destination.
We create path that initially contains the
destination, and we use a variable vertex
that starts at the end of the path, it represents
the green dot we've been working with now. While
vertex still has a previous vertex, then we didn't
reach the source, vertex becomes prev[vertex],
and we add it to the path, as we were doing now
in the example, we were each time moving to the
previous vertex of the actual vertex. After the
loop, we just reverse the path and return it.
What we did now was discussing the pseudocode,
but what about the actual implementation?
I wanted to start with the pseudocode because we
have different choices for the implementation,
so I wanted to first let you focus on the steps,
to understand how the algorithm works, regardless
on how we implement it. By the way, if you still
don't understand something about the algorithm,
if you're still not convinced, even if you have
that little feeling that something is not clear,
you must get rid of it. For that you can
watch the video again, to see the example
again and the explanation, or you can ask
me questions. If you have any doubt right
now about the algorithm, pause the video and
ask me a question, I really want you to do it.
Everything is fine now? You understood the
algorithm? Let's move to the implementation.
The dilemma for the implementation is what
data structure to choose. For dist and prev,
we will obviously use a hash table, where the
key is a vertex, and the value is the shortest
distance and the previous vertex respectively.
But what about open? The problem comes from this
instruction, extract the vertex from open
with the smallest value in dist. Let's use
an array and see what happens. By the way,
the difference between implementations will
mainly be in the time complexity, so
it's what we will evaluate to compare.
Let's start. Traversing the vertices to update
their value and inserting them in open costs |V|,
the number of vertices. Because updating in a hash
table costs O(1) in average and adding an
element to an array costs O(1) amortized.
Now we have the loop. We keep looping while we
have elements in open, but how much iterations the
loop will do? We initially have |V| vertices in
open, we're extracting one vertex per iteration,
and we're not adding new elements to open, we
deduce that we will do |V| loop iterations.
What about vertex extraction now. We want to
extract the vertex with the smallest value
dist[u], we're basically searching for the
minimum. And searching for the minimum in
an array requires traversing the whole set. The
array here has |V| elements, so the cost is |V|.
We also have the loop that traverses neighbors
of u. The number of neighbors of u is its degree,
so the loop does deg(u) iterations,
and operations inside cost O(1).
So the total cost is T(V,E) =
|V| + |V|*|V| + sum(deg(u)).
Here we need to do the sum because we can't
multiply, not all vertices have the same degree.
We just know that the sum of degrees is 2|E|
for an undirected graph and |E| for directed,
we've talked about it in the
chapter about dfs and bfs.
So we have |V| + |V|² + |E|,
which gives O(|V|²+|E|).
We can ignore the |E| because in a simple graph,
the number of edges is smaller than or equal
to |V|², so we get O(|V|²) time complexity.
O(|V|²) is quite slow for this problem,
let's try to find something else.
The solution is to use a priority queue. A
priority queue is a structure where each elements
has a priority, and extracting an element from
it returns the element with the highest priority.
In our problem, the priority of a vertex is
inversely proportional to its value in dist,
the smaller dist[v] is, the
bigger the priority of v is.
And the vertex with the highest priority
is the one with the smallest value dist[v],
the one we're searching for to go to it. And we
will use 3 operations with this priority queue,
we will first use it to insert our |V|
vertices, we also use it to extract the
vertex with the highest priority, and we use
update priority when we update dist[vertex].
Updating the priority is important to
maintain the order in the priority queue.
Starting from this pseudocode, we have the
cost of traversing the |V| vertices, |V|,
the cost of initially inserting the |V| vertices,
in other words building the priority queue,
let's name it Tbuild. We also have the cost of
updating the priority of the source, let's name it
Tupdate. Then the loop does |V| iterations, inside
it we have the cost of extracting the minimum,
let's name it Textract, and we also
have the loop that traverses neighbors.
We know that it does deg(u) iterations,
and inside it we're updating dist[v],
so we're updating the priority
of v, the cost is Tupdate.
The total cost is T(V,E) = |V| + Tbuild +
Tupdate + |V|*Textract + sum(deg(u))*Tupdate.
The sum of degrees is |E|, we get T(V,E) = |V|
+ Tbuild + Tupdate + |V|*Textract + |E|*Tupdate.
Okay now we have our expression, we just need
to find out the cost of Tbuild, Textract,
and Tupdate. And these costs depend on
how we implement the priority queue.
We can do so by using a sorted array. At the
beginning all vertices have the same priority, we
don't need to sort, we just create an array of |V|
vertices, which costs |V|, Tbuild is in O(|V|).
To extract minimum from a sorted array,
assuming that vertices are in decreasing order,
we just go to the last element, which can
be done in O(1). Removing it also costs
O(1) because we're just popping from an array. So
Textract is O(1). But the problem is with Tupdate,
when updating the priority of an element in a
sorted array, we need to take it to its right
position to maintain the order. And doing so
requires us to shift all the elements in the
worst case, which costs |V|, so Tupdate
is in O(|V|). So by using a sorted array,
we get T(V,E) = |V| + |V| + |V| + |V|*1 + |E|*|V|,
which gives a time complexity of O(|E||V|).
O(|E||V|) is also slow, using a sorted array is
not the best choice. A better implementation of
the priority queue is by using a heap. A heap
is a tree data structure that satisfies the
heap property: For each node C, if P is a parent
node of C, then the key of P is greater than or
equal to the key of C if we're in a max-heap,
and smaller or equal if we're in a min-heap.
This is why at the top we can find the node
with the highest priority, the one with the
greatest key if we're in a max-heap and the one
with the smallest key if we're in a min-heap.
In our problem, vertices with small
keys, small values of dist[v],
are the ones with a high priority, so we
will use a min-heap, we want the vertex
with the smallest value dist[v] to be
at the top, to be easily accessible.
And in our problem, we're updating the
key only when we find a smaller key,
when we find a smaller value dist[v], this is
why we will use the decrease_key() operation
of a heap to update the priority, so
Tupdate is the cost of decrease_key().
The heap has many variants, the binary heap,
the binomial heap, the Fibonacci heap, and many
other ones, they slightly differ in behavior
and in time complexity of main operations.
The most popular one is the binary heap, I
won't focus on how it works, because it's
not the subject of this lecture, and I made a
YouTube video on the subject that I recommend
you to watch. I'll just focus on time complexity
of its main operations. Operations we need here
are building a heap of n elements, extracting the
minimum, and decrease key. For the binary heap,
building a heap of n elements is in O(n),
in our case n is |V| so Tbuild is in O(|V|).
Extracting the minimum is done in O(logn)
where n is the number of elements in the heap,
it's not in constant time because it needs to
reorder some nodes to maintain the heap property.
In our case n is |V| so Textract is in O(log|V|).
And decrease_key() is also done in O(logn),
O(log|V|) in our case. In total, we have |V| +
|V| + log|V| + |V|log|V| + |E|log|V|, which gives
a time complexity of O((|E|+|V|)log|V|),
better than when using a sorted array.
But we have a variant that is even better for
Dijkstra's algorithm, it's the Fibonacci heap.
With a Fibonacci heap, building is in |V|, no
difference. Extracting the minimum is in O(logn)
amortized, O(log|V|) amortized. And decrease_key()
is done in O(1) amortized instead of O(logn).
In total, we get |V| + |V|
+ 1 + |V|log|V| + |E|*1,
which gives a time complexity of
O(|E|+|V|log|V|), quite efficient.
Let's code this solution, the one that
uses a Fibonacci heap. The function takes
as parameters the graph, represented as
an adjacency list, and the source vertex.
We create the dist hash table,
we create the prev hash table,
and here we need another hash table nodes to save
the references of nodes that will be in our heap.
We do so because when we want to decrease the
key of a node, we have to provide the reference,
so instead of searching for it, we store
references of nodes to have direct access.
In this nodes table the key will be the label of
the vertex, and the value will be a Node object.
After it we create open, that we can also
name queue, the structure where we will
store unvisited vertices and from where we
will extract the minimum vertex to go to it,
in this solution we use a
Fibonacci heap for its efficiency.
Now we traverse vertices, for each
vertex u, we set dist[u] to infinity,
we set prev[u] to null, and we need
to insert it in the priority queue.
We know that dist[u] is infinity so the key
will be infinity. We also want to store the
label of the current vertex in the node to know
what vertex we're working with when extracting a
node from the Fibonacci heap. The solution is to
put the tuple (dist, label), we fix both problems,
tuples are first compared by their first value,
and we made room for the label. This is why
we create a node with (dist[u], u) as a key,
dist[u] to compare, and u to have the label.
We assign it to nodes[u] to save the reference,
and we insert it in the queue. By the way,
the key is what will give the ability to the
priority queue to compare between its elements and
take the one with the highest priority, here the
key of a node is the value of the vertex in dist.
After it, we set dist[source] to 0, and we
decrease key in open, remember that we decrease
key every time we update dist of some vertex.
Here we've set dist[source] to 0, so we provide
the reference of the node of the source vertex and
decrease its key to the new value of dist[src].
Now we can start looping, we keep
looping while we still have nodes.
The way I found to do that with this fibheap
module is to check if the minimum is not null,
it means we still have a node. Inside the loop,
we extract the minimum vertex and store the
second value of its key in u, it represents
the label of the vertex, for example B.
This is why storing the label is important, we
need to know what vertex we're dealing with.
Then we traverse neighbors, we traverse tuples (v,
w) that are in graph[u], v is the neighbor
and w the distance of the edge from u to v.
The distance of the new path is
dist[u]+w, and we check if it's
better than the shortest path we found so far
to v. If dist[u]+w is smaller than dist[v],
we assign it to dist[v], we set u as prev[v]
as explained earlier, and we decrease key.
We provide the reference of the node of
the vertex v, and the key (dist[v], v).
After the loop, we return dist and prev. And we
finished implementing Dijkstra's algorithm by
using a Fibonacci heap. For the time complexity,
we get O(|E|+|V|log|V|) as explained earlier.
And for the space complexity, we have |V| for each
structure, dist, prev, nodes and queue all hold at
most |V| items, they're storing vertices without
repetition. We get a space complexity of O(|V|).
Now question, what about the visited set?
Why didn't we use a visited set? We're not
using a visited set simply because
we're not re inserting vertices,
queue starts with |V| vertices and we just
keep popping. Not re inserting vertices means
that once we pop a vertex, we're sure that
we won't find a shorter path to it later.
Is it true though? We will talk about it in the
last point of this lecture. Another question,
in the example we've seen, all vertices were
reachable from A, and the algorithm worked
normally. But what if some vertices were not
reachable from A? What would we get as a result?
The algorithm finishes at some point, it doesn't
return an error because of that. It's just that
because some vertices are not reachable from A, we
won't have an edge to reach them, so we will never
update their value in dist and prev. As a result,
if let's say the vertex K is not reachable from A,
dist[K] will remain infinity, and prev[K]
will remain null, it means that we don't
have a previous vertex of K that can take
us to A, we don't have a path from A to K.
So if you want to reconstruct the
shortest path with the function we made,
first make sure that dist of that vertex is not
infinity, make sure that at least one path exists.
Next question, we use Dijkstra's algorithm to
solve the Single-source shortest path problem,
but can it solve other variations?
The answer is yes. It can for example
solve the Single-destination
shortest path problem variation.
To do so, we just replace the graph with
its transpose graph. The transpose graph
of a graph is made just by reversing the
direction of edges, for each edge (u,v),
we add an edge (v,u) in the transpose graph. We
apply Dijkstra's algorithm on the transpose graph,
and we get the results dist and prev. Small
difference in the reconstruct path function,
this time we don't reverse the path, to get
dest as the destination and not as the source.
The time complexity of Dijkstra's
algorithm remains the same.
It can also solve the Single-pair
shortest path problem.
We're getting the shortest path from A to
every other vertex, so technically we're
getting the shortest path to the vertex we set
as a destination, so instead of returning the
whole dist and prev table, we return results
for that specific destination only. We return
dist[destination], and the shortest path itself,
that we can get with the reconstruct function.
We can even stop in the while loop as soon as we
reach the destination vertex, we don't need to
continue remaining ones. Remember that as soon
as we reach a vertex in Dijkstra's algorithm,
then we found its shortest path, we know that we
won't find something better later, remember the
first liquid that reaches a vertex example. So in
the while loop, if the vertex we extract is the
destination, we break, the result will be returned
just after it. The time complexity doesn't change.
What about the All-pairs shortest path
problem? Yes, it's also possible to solve
it by using Dijkstra's algorithm, we'll
see it in the Johnson's algorithm lecture.
Last question: does Dijkstra's algorithm work with
all types of graphs? Well, nope. First problem,
negative cycles. Imagine that we have this graph
and we apply Dijkstra's algorithm, here are the
results we get. We got that the shortest distance
from A to E is 7, by taking the path A->B->E-.
Which is wrong, by looping over the
cycle BCD, we can decrease it to 4,
because the sum of weights of the cycle
BCD is negative, BCD is a negative cycle.
Once again, we can loop over it again and
decrease the distance from A to B to 1.
One more turn and we can make it -2. And we
can continue like this to infinity, so we don't
really have a shortest path from A to B, we can
always add one more turn and get a shorter path.
It's because of the negative cycle, so Dijkstra's
algorithm doesn't work with graphs that contain
negative cycles. Actually, the negative cycle
problem is not proper to Dijkstra's algorithm,
it causes issues with the shortest path problem
in general, even with other algorithms. However,
unlike other algorithms like Bellman-Ford that can
detect that there is a negative cycle, Dijkstra's
algorithm doesn't even detect it, it continues
to run normally and returns the wrong result.
Are negative cycles the only issue with
Dijkstra's? No. Let's take this graph and apply
the algorithm. We start with 0 infinity infinity
infinity. We extract A, it updates dist[B] to 5
and dist[C] to 7. Unvisited vertex with smallest
dist is B, we extract it. We did because we assume
that we found the shortest path to it, now we're
assuming that the shortest distance from A to B is
5. But let's continue and see what happens.
B updates dist[D] to 8. Then we extract C,
it updates dist[B] to 3. Then we extract
D, no out-neighbor, and the algorithm ends.
The result says that the shortest distance from
A to D is 8, which is wrong, it's 6, by taking
A-C-B-D. It's because when we extracted B, we
assumed that we found the shortest path to it,
we didn't know that it was possible to find a
shorter path later. All of this because of this
negative edge, it made our assumption wrong. And
this is why Dijkstra's algorithm doesn't work well
with negative edges, it might still give the right
result, but it might not, like with this example.
If we have only positive edges, this problem
doesn't happen, because the distance can only
increase, which is not the case with negative
weights, a negative edge that comes way later can
decrease dist of a vertex that we extracted
before, which can produce wrong results.
This is why we say that Dijkstra's
algorithm shouldn't be used on a
graph with negative weights, even
if it doesn't have negative cycles.
But there are algorithms that solve the
same problem as Dijkstra's and can handle
negative weights, like the one we will see
in the next lecture: Bellman-Ford algorithm.
I hope that you understood
this lecture, as always,
ask questions if you didn't understand
something. See you in the next lecture!